Check Virtualization Support on Ubuntu 20.04
1. Before you begin with installing KVM, check if your CPU supports hardware virtualization via egrep command:

egrep -c '(vmx|svm)' /proc/cpuinfo

Check the number in the output:

Checking virtualization support using egrep command

If the command returns a value of 0, your processor is not capable of running KVM. On the other hand, any other number means you can proceed with the installation.

2. Now, check if your system can use KVM acceleration by typing:

sudo kvm-ok

The output should look like this:

Checking if the system is set up to run kvm virtualization
If kvm-ok returns an error stating KVM acceleration cannot be used, try solving the problem by installing cpu-checker.

3. To install cpu-checker, run the following command:

sudo apt install cpu-checker

4. When the installation completes, restart the terminal.

You are now ready to start installing KVM.

Note: When it is performed for servers, hardware virtualization is referred to as server virtualization.

Install KVM on Ubuntu 20.04
To enable KVM virtualization on Ubuntu 20.04:

Install related packages using apt
Authorize users to run VMs
Verify that the installation was successful
Step 1: Install KVM Packages
1. First, update the repositories:

sudo apt update

2. Then, install essential KVM packages with the following command:

sudo apt install qemu-kvm libvirt-daemon-system libvirt-clients bridge-utils

This will start the installation of four KVM packages:

Installing the packages necessary to run KVM in Ubuntu 20.04

3. When prompted, type Y, press ENTER, and wait for the installation to finish.

Step 2: Authorize Users
1. Only members of the libvirt and kvm user groups can run virtual machines. Add a user to the libvirt group by typing:

sudo adduser ‘username’ libvirt

Replace username with the actual username.

Adding a user to the libvirt usergroup
2. Now do the same for the kvm group:

sudo adduser ‘[username]’ kvm

Adding user to the kvm usergroup
Note: If you need to remove a user from the libvirt or kvm group, just replace adduser with deluser in the command above.

Step 3: Verify the Installation
1. Confirm the installation was successful by using the virsh command:

virsh list --all

You can expect an output as seen below:

Confirming the installation was successful using virsh command
2. Or use the systemctl command to check the status of libvirtd:

sudo systemctl status libvirtd

If everything is functioning properly, the output returns an active (running) status.

Checking the status of the virtualization daemon with systemctl
3. Press Q to quit the status screen.

4. If the virtualization daemon is not active, activate it with the following command:

sudo systemctl enable --now libvirtd

Creating a Virtual Machine on Ubuntu 20.04
1. Before you choose one of the two methods listed below, install virt-manager, a tool for creating and managing VMs:

sudo apt install virt-manager

Installing virt-manager with apt
2. Type Y and press ENTER. Wait for the installation to finish.

Make sure you download an ISO containing the OS you wish to install on a VM and proceed to pick an installation method.

Method 1: Virt Manager GUI
1. Start virt-manager with:

sudo virt-manager
